Mammals can use their intestines to breathe
May 14, 2021
Cell Press
Rodents and pigs share with certain aquatic organisms the ability to use their intestines for respiration, a new study finds. The researchers
demonstrated that the delivery of oxygen gas or oxygenated liquid through the rectum provided vital rescue to two mammalian models of
respiratory failure.
FULL STORY
Mouse (stock image).
Credit: © creativenature.nl / stock.adobe.com
Rodents and pigs share with certain aquatic organisms the ability to use their intestines for respiration, finds a study
publishing May 14th in the journal Med. The researchers demonstrated that the delivery of oxygen gas or oxygenated
liquid through the rectum provided vital rescue to two mammalian models of respiratory failure.
5/18/2021 Mammals can use their intestines to breathe -- ScienceDaily
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/05/210514134205.htm 2/3
"Artificial respiratory support plays a vital role in the clinical management of respiratory failure due to severe illnesses such as pneumonia or acute
respiratory distress syndrome," says senior study author Takanori Takebe of the Tokyo Medical and Dental University and the Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center. "Although the side effects and safety need to be thoroughly evaluated in humans, our approach may offer a new paradigm to
support critically ill patients with respiratory failure."
Several aquatic organisms have evolved unique intestinal breathing mechanisms to survive under low-oxygen conditions using organs other than lungs
or gills. For example, sea cucumbers, freshwater fish called loaches, and certain freshwater catfish use their intestines for respiration. But it has been
heavily debated whether mammals have similar capabilities.
In the new study, Takebe and his collaborators provide evidence for intestinal breathing in rats, mice, and pigs. First, they designed an intestinal gas
ventilation system to administer pure oxygen through the rectum of mice. They showed that without the system, no mice survived 11 minutes of extremely
low-oxygen conditions. With intestinal gas ventilation, more oxygen reached the heart, and 75% of mice survived 50 minutes of normally lethal lowoxygen conditions.
Because the intestinal gas ventilation system requires abrasion of the intestinal muscosa, it is unlikely to be clinically feasible, especially in severely ill
patients -- so the researchers also developed a liquid-based alternative using oxygenated perfluorochemicals. These chemicals have already been
shown clinically to be biocompatible and safe in humans.
The intestinal liquid ventilation system provided therapeutic benefits to rodents and pigs exposed to non-lethal low-oxygen conditions. Mice receiving
intestinal ventilation could walk farther in a 10% oxygen chamber, and more oxygen reached their heart, compared to mice that did not receive intestinal
ventilation. Similar results were evident in pigs. Intestinal liquid ventilation reversed skin pallor and coldness and increased their levels of oxygen, without
producing obvious side effects. Taken together, the results show that this strategy is effective in providing oxygen that reaches circulation and alleviates
respiratory failure symptoms in two mammalian model systems.
With support from the Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development to combat the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, the
researchers plan to expand their preclinical studies and pursue regulatory steps to accelerate the path to clinical translation.
"The recent SARS-CoV-2 pandemic is overwhelming the clinical need for ventilators and artificial lungs, resulting in a critical shortage of available
devices, and endangering patients' lives worldwide," Takebe says. "The level of arterial oxygenation provided by our ventilation system, if scaled for
human application, is likely sufficient to treat patients with severe respiratory failure, potentially providing life-saving oxygenation."